Slotify: A Smart Web-Based Online Appointment
Scheduling Platform for Service-Based Businesses
Aksh Thakkar

Om Maurya

Daksh Patel

Project Lead & Full-Stack Dev.
Dept. of CSE
Parul Institute of Engineering
and Technology, Gujarat, India
2403031057002@paruluniversity.ac.in

Frontend Developer (UI/UX)
Dept. of CSE
Parul Institute of Engineering
and Technology, Gujarat, India
2403031057048@paruluniversity.ac.in

Backend Developer
Dept. of CSE
Parul Institute of Engineering
and Technology, Gujarat, India
2403031057035@paruluniversity.ac.in

Jainil Patel

Dr. Sneha Soni

Database & Integration Eng.
Dept. of CSE
Parul Institute of Engineering
and Technology, Gujarat, India
2403031057071@paruluniversity.ac.in

Associate Professor (CSE)
Dept. of CSE
Parul Institute of Engineering
and Technology, Gujarat, India
sneha.soni37803@paruluniversity.ac.in

Abstract—Small and medium service-oriented enterprises –
clinics, grooming studios, coaching centres, and consultancy firms
– still coordinate bookings largely by phone and paper register,
a habit that routinely produces double-booked slots, forgotten
appointments, and staff time that nobody bothers to account
for. This paper presents Slotify, a browser-accessible, multitenant booking platform built on the MERN stack (MongoDB,
Express.js, React.js, Node.js) that lets independent businesses
onboard under their own public storefront while sharing a
single application instance. The system’s central engineering
contribution is a slot-availability engine that resolves staff working hours, breaks, holidays, buffer times, and advance-booking
windows into a live grid of open slots, backed by a databaseenforced unique constraint that makes a race-condition double
booking structurally impossible rather than merely unlikely
in practice. We document the architecture, the booking and
reschedule algorithms in pseudocode, and a feature-by-feature
comparison against three commercial platforms actually in use
today – Calendly, Booksy, and Fresha – as well as two previously
published academic prototypes. Unlike prior systems, which each
cover a fragment of the scheduling lifecycle, Slotify combines
tenant-scoped multi-staff scheduling, audited reschedule history,
and a public discovery layer without per-seat licensing or marketplace commission. We close by discussing, with reference to
existing clinical and operational literature rather than unverified
benchmarks of our own, where the architecture is expected to
help and where its current single-location, English-only scope still
falls short of production-grade commercial offerings.
Keywords—Online Booking System, MERN Stack, Multi-Tenant
Architecture, Slot Management, Atomic Concurrency Control,
JSON Web Token, Automated Reminders, MongoDB Atlas, Appointment Audit Trail

I.

I NTRODUCTION

A hair salon owner in a mid-sized Indian city still runs
her appointment book the way her mother did: a diary by
the register, a phone that rings during the one hour she
has free to actually cut hair, and a mental note of which
regulars tend to no-show on Mondays. This is not a failure

of ambition – it is what happens when the tools available
to a five-person clinic or salon are either built for a single
professional’s personal calendar or priced and structured for
a national retail chain. Growing consumer expectations for
on-demand digital services have exposed exactly this gap.
Clinics, beauty parlours, tutoring institutes, and fitness studios
still depend heavily on receptionist-managed phone queues
and handwritten registers, an approach that scales poorly and
introduces avoidable operational friction [6]. When a booking
record lives only in a notebook, one clerical slip cascades into
overlapping reservations, wasted service capacity, and a client
who does not come back [2].
The economic argument for fixing this is not speculative.
Multiple health-system studies report that reminder-equipped
digital platforms measurably cut no-show rates, though – as
we discuss in Section II, and contrary to how this finding is
sometimes summarised – the size of the effect depends heavily
on the care setting, not just the presence of a reminder [7].
Primary-care research shows that structured online booking
meaningfully compresses the administrative burden on frontdesk teams [3], [4], and a 2024 industry survey found that
businesses without any centralised booking tool report more
staff overtime and more revenue that simply evaporates unbilled [6].
This paper introduces Slotify: a browser-accessible, multitenant appointment platform built on the MERN stack [19],
[20]. What actually distinguishes it from a personal scheduling
link is not any single feature but the fact that a business – with
its own staff roster, working hours, and service catalogue – is
a first-class object in the data model, and that a customer can
discover that business through a shared public directory rather
than needing its URL in advance.
The engineering core of what follows is really one contribution wearing two hats: a three-tier architecture and slotresolution algorithm, expressed as pseudocode, that turns staff
working hours, breaks, holidays, and buffer rules into a

live grid of bookable slots, paired with a database-enforced
concurrency scheme – a finite-state model plus an atomic
reservation algorithm – that removes double-booking as a
possible outcome rather than merely reducing its probability.
We separate the two only because the second doesn’t make
sense without the first: there is no point guaranteeing atomic
writes against a slot grid that was computed wrong to begin
with.
Beyond that, we contribute a grounded, source-verified
comparison of Slotify against three commercial platforms in
active use (Calendly, Booksy, Fresha) and two previously
published academic prototypes, built from each vendor’s own
documentation rather than secondary marketing copy. And we
say plainly, in Section IX, what we have not done: Slotify has
not been load-tested or put through a formal security audit,
and no simulated number stands in for that missing work.

B. Domain-Specific Web Booking Implementations
Wankhade et al. [15] built a functional appointment tool
aimed at connecting patients, doctors, and pharmacy vendors;
the published description does not detail live slot synchronisation across concurrent users, which is precisely the gap
a document-oriented, event-driven stack is suited to close.
Chauhan et al. [16] paired a physician directory with a Djangobased booking back end, validating demand for a combined
discovery-and-booking journey – the same journey Slotify’s
public business-discovery layer targets, but for salons, tutors,
and consultants rather than doctors specifically. Additional
published prototypes [12]–[14], [17], [18] reinforce that the
demand for digital scheduling is sector-wide, while also
showing that no single prior academic tool combines multitenant business accounts, staff-level scheduling, and a public
marketplace in one system.
C. MERN as an Application Platform

II.

R ELATED W ORK

A. Evolution of Appointment Booking Platforms
Early work by Akinode and Oloruntoba [11] established
that computerising patient appointment registration was feasible, though their prototype operated without live slot updates.
Atherton et al. [3] found that patients using portal-based
booking reported higher satisfaction than those relying on
telephone channels, and a JMIR evidence synthesis [5] catalogued recurring design gaps across eighteen published webbased medical scheduling systems – live availability, automatic
reminders, and calendar linkage came up again and again as
the features users wanted and did not have. Those three gaps
shaped Slotify’s feature set directly.
Srivastava et al. [1] linked scheduling friction to post-visit
dissatisfaction, and Shayan et al. [8] surfaced three satisfaction
predictors from clinic stakeholders – responsiveness, notification reliability, and role-appropriate interfaces – that shaped
Slotify’s UX priorities more than any single design guideline
did. Kaluza et al. [9] gave a formal treatment of how visible
occupancy in a booking queue can be used to signal service
quality, an idea that motivated the analytics view in Slotify’s
provider dashboard even though we have not yet built out the
predictive layer they describe.
The most carefully controlled evidence on reminders and
no-shows, however, complicates the simple story. Betancor
et al. [7] compared online versus telephone appointment
scheduling across both a private ophthalmology practice and
a university hospital eye clinic. In the private practice, the
no-show rate fell from 5.9% to 1.8% after online scheduling
was introduced – a genuinely large relative improvement. In
the hospital setting, however, no-shows did not improve at all;
they rose slightly, from 11.2% to 14.3%. The authors’ own
reading is that patient population and appointment lead time,
not the booking channel itself, drove the difference. We take
this as a caution rather than an inconvenience: a MERN-based
booking layer like Slotify is a necessary condition for the kind
of improvement seen in the private-practice arm of that study,
but it is evidently not sufficient on its own, and we do not
claim otherwise.

Baiskar et al. [19] found MERN particularly well suited
to applications with frequent, event-driven data mutations –
a description that matches a live booking system closely,
since every slot query and every reservation attempt is exactly
that kind of mutation. A comparative study of the stack [20]
noted that MongoDB’s schema-flexible document model absorbs evolving service and slot structures with less migration
overhead than a rigid relational schema would require, which
matched our own experience adding fields like bufferTime
and unavailableDates well after the initial schema was
designed.
D. Stateless Authentication and Reminder-Driven Attendance
JWT has become the default credential mechanism for
RESTful APIs because its self-contained, signed payload
removes the need for server-side session storage [21]–[23],
which matters once an API needs to run as more than one
replica behind a load balancer. Pairing JWT with Google
OAuth lets a first-time customer book an appointment without
first inventing a password, removing what is often the single
largest drop-off point in a booking funnel.
On reminders specifically: Ginat and Kenniff [24] showed
a multi-modal reminder system at a radiology unit produced
a statistically significant drop in unfilled scan slots. Parikh et
al. [25] identified email as a high-impact channel for reducing
no-shows among working-age patients. Tarabichi et al. [26]
ran a randomised quality-improvement trial layering predictive,
risk-driven telephone outreach on top of standard automated
reminders in a safety-net primary care clinic; their central
finding was about equity – whether the intervention narrowed
or widened no-show disparities across racial and ethnic groups
– rather than a single headline percentage, and we cite it
here for that finding rather than for a number that would
misrepresent the study’s actual design. Two systematic reviews
together cover more than thirty independent reminder trials and
reach a consistent, if modest, conclusion: automated reminders
help, but they are not a complete fix on their own [27], [28].
That is the honest justification for Slotify’s cron-scheduled 24hour reminder pipeline – a defensible design choice grounded
in a real and repeated finding, not a guarantee.

E. Identified Research Gap

CLIENT LAYER

Across this literature, no single JavaScript-native platform
combines multi-tenant business accounts, live staff-level slot
resolution, database-enforced conflict prevention, and a public
discovery directory in one open, self-hostable codebase. Commercial platforms that come close – surveyed in Section V –
solve this by charging per seat or by taking a commission on
marketplace-driven bookings, which is a reasonable business
model but a real cost for a business running on thin margins.
Slotify is offered as a concrete, if less commercially mature,
alternative to that trade-off.
III.

React.js
Web App

Mobile
(Future)

API / LOGIC LAYER
Auth
JWT / OAuth

Scheduling
Engine

Express.js REST API Router

Notification
Service

Analytics
Aggregator

P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
DATA LAYER

Three related failure modes recur across service microenterprises that still run scheduling manually.
Unstructured booking channels and chronic nonattendance turn out to be the same problem seen from two
angles. Coordinating reservations across phone calls, WhatsApp threads, and a paper register introduces inconsistency at
every touchpoint, and staff must reconcile overlapping requests
without any algorithmic guard against double allocation [6],
[11]. The same absence of a system-of-record is what makes a
booking, made days in advance with no subsequent touchpoint,
easy for a customer to forget or deprioritise. Reported nonattendance rates in purely manual environments commonly sit
between 15% and 30% [25], [27], and that spread is wide
precisely because it depends on whether anything nudges the
client between booking and appointment day – which, in
a manual system, nothing does. Outside business hours, no
booking mechanism exists at all, quietly capping demand the
business never even sees.
Fragmented operational visibility is the third and more
diffuse problem. A business without a centralised booking
repository cannot measure slot utilisation, cannot track cancellation patterns, and cannot forecast a busy week [9], [10].
Growth decisions get made on gut feeling, and syncing the
schedule with a staff member’s personal calendar means manually re-typing it.
IV.

Admin
Panel

S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE

A. Architectural Overview
Slotify uses a conventional three-tier decomposition – a
React.js client, an Express.js REST layer, and a MongoDB
Atlas data store – chosen specifically so that any tier can be
scaled or replaced without touching the other two. Fig. 1 shows
the logic tier’s internal module boundaries: authentication, the
scheduling engine, the notification dispatcher, and the analytics
aggregator sit behind a shared API router, each with its own
area of responsibility and its own collection(s) to read and
write.
Tenant isolation is logical, not physical: every business, service, staff, and appointment document carries a businessId
field, and every query the application issues is scoped by
it. This was a deliberate trade-off. Spinning up a database
per tenant would have made the isolation guarantee stronger
and the operational story much worse – a hundred small
salons would mean a hundred databases to back up, migrate,
and monitor. A single shared collection set with compound

MongoDB
Atlas

Cloudinary
Storage

SMTP
Relay

Fig. 1. Three-tier architecture of Slotify: client, API/logic, and data layers,
with the scheduling engine and notification dispatcher as independent modules
behind a shared router.

indexes on businessId keeps operations simple at the cost
of relying on application-level query discipline rather than the
database engine itself to enforce the boundary. For a platform
at this stage, we judged that trade worth making; it would need
revisiting well before Slotify tried to serve regulated data like
health records at scale.
V.

C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS WITH E XISTING P LATFORMS

A fair comparison has to start from what these platforms
actually publish about themselves, not from how they are
usually summarised in blog posts, so the entries below are
drawn from each vendor’s own pricing and feature pages as of
mid-2026, plus the two academic prototypes already discussed
in Section II.
Calendly [31] is, at its core, a personal and team meeting
scheduler. It checks one or more of a user’s own connected
calendars (Google, Outlook, iCloud) for conflicts and writes
new bookings into them; multi-calendar conflict checking,
payment collection via Stripe/PayPal, and round-robin team
distribution are all gated behind its Standard and Teams tiers,
priced per user per month. There is no concept of a business
entity with its own staff roster and service catalogue, and no
public discovery marketplace – a customer needs the specific
booking link, not a directory search.
Booksy [32] is much closer in spirit to Slotify: it is
explicitly multi-tenant, gives each business a public storefront, and operates a consumer-facing marketplace where new
clients discover salons and barbershops by category and location. It bundles staff scheduling, point-of-sale, and marketing
tools into a single per-location subscription (advertised from
$29.99/month) with additional per-staff charges, and it markets
a no-show reduction of up to 25% through deposits and
reminders – a vendor claim we report as such, not as an
independently verified figure.

Fresha [33] takes a different commercial approach: the
core subscription is free, and Fresha instead charges a onetime 20% commission on new clients acquired through its own
marketplace, plus standard payment-processing fees. Featurewise it covers staff shift scheduling, commission tracking,
POS, and automated SMS/email reminders, aimed squarely at
the beauty, wellness, and healthcare verticals.
Table I summarises the comparison on criteria that matter
specifically for a multi-staff service business, rather than a
generic feature checklist. An entry is marked Unconfirmed
where the vendor’s own documentation did not settle the
question either way.
The pattern across the three commercial products is consistent: whichever one you pick, you are trading a percentage
of revenue or a per-seat fee for genuine production maturity –
payment processing, mobile apps, years of edge-case handling.
Slotify’s contribution is not that it does any one of these
things better; it does not yet do most of them at all. What
it offers is the specific combination of multi-tenant scheduling
logic and a database-level correctness guarantee against double
booking, built on a stack a small development team can read,
modify, and deploy without a recurring commission on every
new client. That is a narrower claim than a feature-count table
can fully convey, and it is the honest one.
VI.

B OOKING AND C ONCURRENCY A LGORITHMS

The scheduling engine’s correctness rests on two pieces of
logic: turning a day’s working hours into a list of candidate
slots, and making the act of claiming one of those slots atomic
at the database level so that two customers racing for the same
slot cannot both win.
A. Slot Resolution
Algorithm 1 mirrors the logic implemented in
availabilityCalculator.js. It short-circuits early on
holidays and closed days, then for each eligible staff member
walks through the working-day window in increments of the
requested service’s duration, discarding any candidate slot
that falls inside a break, inside the minimum-advance window,
beyond the maximum-advance window, or inside an existing
appointment’s buffer-inclusive span.
Two things about this algorithm are worth being direct
about. First, it runs identically on the server for every booking
attempt – the client-side calendar view is a convenience, not a
source of truth, precisely because a client-supplied timestamp
cannot be trusted to reflect what is still actually open by the
time the request lands. Second, the deduplication priority in
line 22 was not obvious in the first draft of the design: an
early version simply took whichever staff record was queried
first, which meant a slot could show as B OOKED to a customer
even when a different staff member covering the same service
was, in fact, free. Preferring AVAILABLE across all matching
staff records fixed that, at the cost of the slightly more complex
merge step shown above.
B. Atomic Reservation and Conflict Resolution
Fig. 2 models a slot’s lifecycle as a four-state automaton.
A viewer browsing the calendar places a soft, non-blocking

Algorithm 1 ComputeAvailableSlots
Require: business B, service S, date d, optional staff filter F
Ensure: ordered list of slot statuses for date d
1: if d ∈ B.holidays or not B.workingHours[d].isOpen then
2:
return ∅
▷ business closed that day
3: end if
4: staffList ← active staff assigned to S (filtered by F if
given)
5: slots ← ∅
6: for each staff st in staffList do
7:
if d ∈ st.unavailableDates then continue
8:
end if
9:
w ← st.workingHours[d] or B.workingHours[d]
10:
t ← w.start
11:
while t + S.duration ≤ w.end do
12:
cand ← [t, t + S.duration)
13:
if cand overlaps st.breaks then
14:
mark cand as U NAVAILABLE
15:
else if t < now +B.minAdvance then
16:
mark cand as T OO S OON
17:
else if t > now +B.maxAdvance then
18:
mark cand as T OO FAR
19:
else if cand overlaps any scheduled appt for st
(incl. buffer) then
20:
mark cand as B OOKED
21:
else
22:
mark cand as AVAILABLE
23:
end if
24:
slots ← slots ∪ {(t, st, status)}
25:
t ← t + S.duration
26:
end while
27: end for
28: deduplicate overlapping (t, ·) entries across staff, preferring AVAILABLE ≻ T OO S OON ≻ T OO FAR ≻ B OOKED
29: return slots
V IEWED marker; confirming a booking attempts to promote
the slot directly to R ESERVED via a single conditional write.
view (soft, 30s)

Available

book (atomic)

Viewed

confirm

Reserved

Booked

timeout

cancel

Fig. 2. Slot lifecycle state machine. The book transition is the single atomic
write that either succeeds outright or fails cleanly, with no partial state in
between. The timeout and cancel return paths are drawn at different depths
so they do not cross.

Algorithm 2 shows the reservation attempt itself. The critical property is that step 2 is a single conditional database operation (a findOneAndUpdate-style compare-and-set backed
by the unique partial index on {businessId, staffId,
appointmentDate, startTime} filtered to status =
"scheduled"), not a read followed by a separate write.
Two customers racing for the same slot both reach step 2,
but the database engine, not application code, decides which
write lands first and rejects the other – which is the only
place a guarantee like this can actually live, since two Node.js
request handlers running concurrently have no shared memory

TABLE I.

Capability

F EATURE COMPARISON : S LOTIFY AGAINST COMMERCIAL PLATFORMS AND PRIOR ACADEMIC PROTOTYPES

Slotify

Multi-tenant business accounts
Public discovery / marketplace
DB-enforced
doublebooking prevention
Staff-level working hours
& buffers
Reschedule limits with
audit trail
JWT + Google OAuth
Automated
email
reminders
Self-hostable / no per-seat
fee
Production hardening &
scale

Calendly [31]

Fresha [33]

Academic
prototypes
[16]

[15],

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes (own directory)

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes (unique partial
index)
Yes

Partial (relies on external calendar sync)
Partial (per-user only)

Yes

Yes

Unconfirmed

Yes

Yes

Unconfirmed

Yes

No

Unconfirmed

Partial

No

Yes
Yes

Google Calendar-based
Yes

Unconfirmed
Yes

Unconfirmed
Yes

Partial [16]
Unconfirmed

Yes

No (per-user SaaS)

No (per-location +
fees)
Extensive

No (marketplace commission)
Extensive

Yes (published prototype)
Not demonstrated

Not
demonstrated

yet

Extensive

to coordinate through.
Algorithm 2 AttemptReservation
Require: candidate slot (t, st, S, cust)
1: re-run C OMPUTE AVAILABLE S LOTS restricted to (t, st)
2: if status ̸= AVAILABLE then
3:
return C ONFLICT
▷ surface next-available slot to
client
4: end if
5: r ← atomic conditional insert into appointments
keyed on (B.id, st.id, t.date, t.time)
guarded by unique partial index (status =
scheduled)
6: if r fails (index violation) then
7:
return C ONFLICT
▷ lost the race; another request
won
8: else
9:
enqueue confirmation email and 24h reminder job
10:
return C ONFIRMED
11: end if
This two-step shape – re-check, then attempt an atomic
write, then handle rejection as a normal outcome rather
than an exception – is the same pattern used for rescheduling, with three extra eligibility gates applied before step
1: a walk-in appointment cannot be rescheduled at all, the
new time must satisfy the business’s rescheduleWindow
(e.g. at least one hour before the original slot), and
the appointment’s rescheduleCount must be below its
maxReschedulesPerAppointment. We chose to update
the existing appointment document in place on a successful
reschedule, rather than cancel-and-recreate, specifically so that
a single actionLog array on one document tells the full story
of a booking’s life – every reschedule, who did it, and why –
without the audit trail being spread across several documents
that would need to be joined back together later.
VII.

Booksy [32]

I MPLEMENTATION T ECHNOLOGY C HOICES

Table II lists the concrete library versions in use. The
rationale for MERN over a LAMP- or Django-based alternative

was not purely technical: all four of us already worked in
JavaScript day to day, and a single-language stack across
client and server measurably shortened the time from a design
discussion to a working prototype, which mattered more for a
semester-scoped project than raw runtime performance would
have.
TABLE II.

S LOTIFY TECHNOLOGY STACK SUMMARY

Layer

Technologies

Frontend

React.js v18, Vite, Tailwind CSS, React Router v6, Axios,
React Hook Form, date-fns, Lucide React
Node.js, Express.js v4, Mongoose v8, express-rate-limit
JWT (HS256, access + refresh), Passport.js with Google
OAuth 2.0, bcryptjs
MongoDB Atlas, Mongoose ODM
Cloudinary (logos, gallery, verification documents)
Nodemailer (SMTP), node-cron

Backend
Auth
Database
Storage
Notifications

Express.js handles route dispatch and middleware chaining; incoming request bodies are validated before they reach
business logic, which mattered in practice the first time a
malformed date string from a mis-configured client silently
produced an appointment dated in 1970 during early testing –
a bug that motivated moving validation ahead of the controller
layer rather than leaving it scattered inside individual route
handlers. JWT access tokens carry only userId and role
and are verified independently by any API replica, which is the
property that matters for horizontal scaling; the longer-lived
refresh token sits in an HTTP-only, SameSite=Strict cookie
specifically so that neither a cross-site script nor a stolen
localStorage value is enough to renew a session on its
own.

VIII.

E ND - TO -E ND B OOKING W ORKFLOW

Fig. 3 traces a single appointment from a first-time visit
through to the provider dashboard reflecting the new booking,
with two guard clauses – credential verification and slot
availability – that route the user back a step on failure rather
than terminating the session outright.

1. Login / Register
no: show error

Auth OK?
yes

2. Browse Business & Service

location, a single language, and a single currency per business;
payment collection is out of scope, so a confirmed booking
cannot yet double as a receipt; and the analytics view aggregates history without forecasting anything. Measured against
the platforms in Table I, Slotify is also, plainly, less mature –
no mobile app, no payment processing, no years of production
incident history to have learned from. Closing that gap, not
proving a benchmark number nobody asked for, is the actual
roadmap.

3. View Real-Time Slots
no: next slot

X.

P ROJECTED I MPACT OF S LOTIFY

Slot free?
yes

4. Confirm Booking (atomic)

5. Email + reminder queue + dashboard update

Fig. 3. Slotify booking workflow with authentication and slot-conflict guard
clauses.

IX.

D ISCUSSION : E XPECTED B ENEFITS AND H ONEST
L IMITATIONS

It would be easy, and dishonest, to fill this section with
load-test numbers. We have not run a formal load test against
a staging deployment, and we have not commissioned or
performed a security audit against the OWASP Top 10 or any
other framework. What follows instead is a distinction we think
matters more than it usually gets credit for: some things about
Slotify are true by construction, and some things are merely
plausible given what other people have measured, and mixing
the two together is how a design document turns into marketing
copy.
The double-booking guarantee is in the first category. The
unique partial index described in Section VI means a doublebooked slot is not merely rare – it is not a representable state
in the appointments collection at all, given status =
"scheduled". That is provable from the schema itself, and
it is the only claim in this section we would defend without
a citation, because it does not depend on how Slotify’s users
happen to behave.
The reminder pipeline’s expected effect on no-shows is
not in that category, and pretending otherwise would be the
dishonest move. It is a defensible design choice, supported
by a body of evidence that automated reminders reduce noshows in aggregate [24], [25], [27], [28] – but Betancor et
al.’s split result [7] is the more honest baseline expectation than
that aggregate framing suggests: meaningful improvement in
a private-practice-like setting, no guarantee at all in a highervolume institutional one. A salon or tutoring centre – Slotify’s
actual target – sits structurally closer to the private-practice
case, a known and stable clientele with predictable lead times,
than to a hospital eye clinic, which is grounds for cautious
optimism rather than a claimed number. We would rather be
caught underselling this than overselling it.
None of that closes the gap to what a commercial deployment actually needs. The current release assumes a single

Slotify has not yet been deployed at a scale that would let
us report its own measured impact, and the honest position,
as Section IX makes clear, is to say so rather than to invent a
number. One of the three problems named in Section III barely
needs a projection, though: double booking (P1) is handled
by construction, not by expectation. Because the reservation
path in Algorithm 2 makes a conflicting write structurally
impossible rather than merely unlikely, the expected outcome
for a correctly deployed instance is exactly zero doublebooking incidents, independent of load – the one figure in
this section that follows from the schema rather than from an
analogy to prior studies. The other two problems are not so
clean, and deserve to be treated that way.
Non-attendance (P2) is where an honest answer has to be
a range, not a point. Fig. 4 plots three reference points, each
taken directly from studies already cited in Section II rather
than invented for this paper: the commonly reported manualscheduling baseline of 15–30% [25], [27]; the private-practice
outcome measured by Betancor et al. after online scheduling
replaced telephone booking (5.9% falling to 1.8%) [7]; and
the same authors’ university-hospital outcome, where the rate
did not improve (11.2% rising to 14.3%) [7]. Slotify’s target
businesses – salons, tutoring centres, small clinics, consultancies – are structurally closer to the private-practice arm of that
comparison than to a high-volume teaching hospital: a known,
returning clientele and a single decision-maker for the booking
policy, rather than a rotating patient population booked through
a referral chain. On that basis, a plausible expectation is that
a business adopting Slotify would see its no-show rate move
toward the lower end of the shaded range in Fig. 4 rather than
stay at the manual baseline – but Betancor et al.’s hospital
result is the reason this paper stops short of promising it.
plausible envelope for a Slotify deployment

Manual scheduling
(literature range)

15–30%

5.9%

Online scheduling –
private practice [7]
1.8%

11.2%

Online scheduling –
university hospital [7]
14.3%

No-show rate (%)
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Fig. 4. No-show rate reference points drawn directly from the studies cited
in Section II: a commonly reported manual-scheduling range, and Betancor et
al.’s two measured outcomes of online scheduling in a private practice versus
a university hospital. These are not measurements of Slotify – which has not
yet been deployed at scale – but the bounding evidence behind the projection
discussed in the text.

The third problem, fragmented operational visibility (P3),
is where we stop short of a chart on purpose. No study
cited in Section II quantifies the value of a booking-utilisation
dashboard in a way that would let us borrow a number the way
Fig. 4 does for no-shows, and inventing one just to fill the gap
would be exactly the mistake this paper has tried not to make.
What can be said is directional, and comes from Kaluza et
al. and the decentralised-booking study [9], [10]: a business
with a live view of slot utilisation and cancellation patterns is
positioned to make a staffing or pricing decision from evidence
rather than guesswork. Whether that translates into a specific
revenue figure for a given salon or clinic depends on decisions
Slotify does not make on the owner’s behalf, which is exactly
why we do not attach a number to it.
XI.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

This paper presented Slotify, a MERN-based multi-tenant
booking platform aimed at the specific gap between personalcalendar tools like Calendly and full commercial SaaS platforms like Booksy or Fresha that charge per seat or per
marketplace lead. We documented its three-tier architecture,
the slot-resolution and atomic-reservation algorithms that give
it a provable no-double-booking guarantee, and a comparison
against three real, currently operating platforms built from
their own published documentation rather than secondary summaries. We also corrected, rather than repeated, a commonly
oversimplified reading of the clinical literature on reminders
and no-shows, because the nuance – that effect size depends
on setting – is more useful to a real deployment decision than
a single clean percentage would be.
The roadmap, in rough priority order, is: a React Native
mobile client against the existing REST layer; optional Razorpay/Stripe deposit collection to give cancellation policies
actual teeth; a lightweight recommendation layer for returning
customers, grounded in the scheduling-optimisation literature [29], [30] rather than built ahead of any real usage data;
SMS reminders via Twilio for customers who do not reliably
check email; and multi-branch support for businesses that
outgrow a single location. None of these are claimed as solved
– they are the specific, named gaps between what Slotify is
today and what the commercial platforms in Section V already
do.

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The team is grateful to Dr. Sneha Soni, Associate Professor,
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Parul Institute of Engineering and Technology, Vadodara, Gujarat, India,
for the technical direction and the repeated, useful pushback
that shaped this project at every stage. We also acknowledge
the maintainers of the MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, and
Node.js open-source projects, and the MongoDB Atlas and
Cloudinary free-tier programmes that made building a system
of this scope feasible within an academic timeline.
R EFERENCES
[1]

A. Srivastava, R. Sharma, and S. Sinha, “Impact of Appointment
Scheduling in Patient Experience,” American Journal of Medicine and
Medical Sciences, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2912–2918, 2024.

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]

HRMARS, “An Implementation of Digital Platform to Enhance the
Appointment Scheduling System,” Int. J. of Academic Research in
Business and Social Sciences, vol. 14, no. 2, 2024.
H. Atherton, A. Eccles et al., “Investigating Patient Use and Experience
of Online Appointment Booking in Primary Care: Mixed Methods
Study,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 26, p. e51931, 2024.
L. Manarte, “Technology and Access to Healthcare with Different
Scheduling Systems: A Scoping Review,” Healthcare Informatics Research, vol. 30, no. 3, p. 194, 2024.
A. C. P. Castro, “Web-Based Medical Appointment Systems: A Systematic Review,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 19, no. 4,
p. e134, 2017.
IJNRD, “A Study on Online Appointment Scheduling and Healthcare
Efficiency,” IJNRD, vol. 10, 2025.
P. Kammrath Betancor, D. Boehringer, J. Jordan, C. Lüchtenberg, M.
Lambeck, M. C. Ketterer, T. Reinhard, and M. Reich, “Efficient Patient
Care in the Digital Age: Impact of Online Appointment Scheduling in
a Medical Practice and a University Hospital on the ‘No-Show’-Rate,”
Frontiers in Digital Health, vol. 7, 2025.
M. Shayan et al., “Stakeholders’ Experiences, Perceptions and Satisfaction with an Electronic Appointment System,” BMC Health Services
Research, 2025.
I. Kaluza, G. Voigt, K. Haase, and A. Dietze, “Control of OnlineAppointment Systems When the Booking Status Signals Quality of
Service,” Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research, vol. 76, no. 3,
p. 397, 2024.
Expert Systems with Applications, “A Paradigm Shift in Appointment
Scheduling: Introducing a Decentralized Integrated Online Booking
System,” ScienceDirect, vol. 255, 2024.
J. L. Akinode and S. Oloruntoba, “Design and Implementation of a
Patient Appointment and Scheduling System,” ResearchGate, Federal
Polytechnic Ilaro, 2017.
ResearchGate, “A Web-Based Doctor Appointment System,” 2024.
ResearchGate, “Online Doctors Appointment System Project Report,”
2023.
ResearchGate, “Developing an Online Patient Appointment Scheduling
System Based on Web Services Architecture.”
A. S. Wankhade, P. M. Bambal, S. S. Kharkar, S. D. Solao, M. V.
Charthal, and N. G. Rathi, “Research Paper on: Doctor Appointment
Booking System,” IJRASET, DOI: 10.22214/ijraset.2023.52133, 2023.
U. Chauhan et al., “Doctor Finder and Appointment Booking Website
using DJANGO,” in Proc. 2022 Int. Conf. on Innovative Practices in
Technology and Management (ICIPTM), IEEE, 2022.
ResearchGate, “Mr. Doc: A Doctor Appointment Application System.”
ResearchGate, “FastDoc: An Online Appointment Booking System,”
2019.
Y. Baiskar et al., “MERN: A Full-Stack Development,” IJRASET, vol.
10, no. 1, 2022.
Academia.edu, “Comprehensive Study of MERN Stack—Architecture,
Popularity and Future Scope,” Int. J. of Scientific Research in Computer
Science, Engg. and IT, 2021.
FreeCodeCamp, “Securing Node.js RESTful APIs with JSON Web
Tokens,” Medium, 2018.
TopCoder, “Authentication and Authorization in Express.js API using
JWT.”
DigitalOcean, “How To Use JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) in Express.js,”
2025.
D. Ginat and J. Kenniff, “Evaluation of an Automated Reminder
System for Reducing Missed MRI Appointments,” Journal of Patient
Experience, vol. 10, 2023.
K. Parikh et al., “The Effectiveness of Outpatient Appointment Reminder Systems in Reducing No-Show Rates,” The American Journal
of Medicine, vol. 123, no. 6, pp. 542–548, 2010.
Y. Tarabichi, J. Higginbotham, N. Riley, D. C. Kaelber, and B. Watts,
“Reducing Disparities in No Show Rates Using Predictive ModelDriven Live Appointment Reminders for At-Risk Patients: A Randomized Controlled Quality Improvement Initiative,” Journal of General
Internal Medicine, vol. 38, no. 13, pp. 2921–2927, 2023.

[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

BMC Health Services Research, “Appointment Reminder Systems are
Effective but Not Optimal: A Systematic Review,” PMC, 2016.
Pan African Medical Journal, “The Effect of Patient Reminders in
Reducing Missed Appointment in Medical Settings: A Systematic
Review,” One Health, vol. 2, no. 9, 2020.
S. Chatterjee et al., “An Optimization-Based Scheduling Methodology
for Appointment Systems with Heterogeneous Customers,” INFORMS
Journal on Computing, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1624–1649, 2025.
Ö. Ünsal, H. Üster, and C. Oguz, “Incorporating Patients’ Appointment
Date Preferences into Decision-Making: A Simulation and Optimization
Study,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 196, p. 110521, 2024.
Calendly, “Choose the right Calendly plan for your team” and official pricing documentation, accessed July 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://calendly.com/pricing
Booksy Biz, “All-in-one solution for scheduling, payments, and marketplace discovery,” official business documentation, accessed July 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://biz.booksy.com/
Fresha, “Pricing and Features,” official documentation, accessed July
2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.fresha.com/pricing

